Add quick start page for importing workflows (#5281)
PennyLaneAI/pennylane: doc/introduction/importing_circuits.rst

.. role:: html(raw)
   :format: html

.. _intro_ref_importing_circuits:

> Importing Circuits

Author: Ah, good eye! 👀

<https://pennylane.ai/qml/demos/tutorial_quantum_circuit_cutting/>`_ to reduce the number of qubits
required to implement the circuit. You could also :ref:`compile <intro_ref_compile_circuits>` the
circuit using `Catalyst <https://docs.pennylane.ai/projects/catalyst/en/stable/index.html>`__ or
execute the circuit remotely using a supported hardware provider.

Qiskit
~~~~~~

To import a quantum circuit from Qiskit, you must first install the `PennyLane-Qiskit
<https://docs.pennylane.ai/projects/qiskit/en/stable/>`__ plugin. This can be done by running:

.. code-block::

    pip install pennylane-qiskit

Now, suppose we define a Qiskit `QuantumCircuit
<https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit>`__ as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

    qk_circuit = QuantumCircuit(2, 1)
    qk_circuit.h(0)
    qk_circuit.cx(0, 1)
    qk_circuit.measure_all()

We can convert the ``QuantumCircuit`` into a PennyLane quantum function using:

.. code-block:: python

    import pennylane as qml

    pl_template_from_qk = qml.from_qiskit(qk_circuit)

> Above, the :func:`from_qiskit` function converts a ``QuantumCircuit`` into a PennyLane template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Above, the :func:`~penylane.io.from_qiskit` function converts a ``QuantumCircuit`` into a PennyLane template.
```

The link as-is is not working. I think this fixes it?

Author: Just ``` :func:`~pennylane.from_qiskit_op` ``` should suffice!

This template can then be called from inside a QNode to generate a PennyLane circuit:

.. code-block:: python

    @qml.qnode(qml.device("default.qubit"))
    def pl_circuit_from_qk():

>         pl_template_from_qk(wires=[0, 1])
>         return qml.expval(qml.Y(0)), qml.expval(qml.Z(1))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        measurements = pl_template_from_qk(wires=[0, 1])
        return [qml.expval(m) for m in  measurements]
```

I think we should either do this, or remove the `qml.measure_all` from the circuit. It doesn't actually make a difference for this circuit, but the way this is done here, we do a measurement in the Y basis after a projective measurement into the Z basis. I think this is bad practice and shouldn't be in our examples. What are other people's thoughts on this?

Reviewer 2: Yes +1 to remove the `measure_all`

Author: @trbromley To clarify, are you suggesting to remove `measure_all` or adopt @lillian542's suggestion? Or both?

Reviewer 2: We can just remove the `measure_all`, and then I think the current makes sense, i.e.
```
        pl_template_from_qk(wires=[0, 1])
        return qml.expval(qml.Y(0)), qml.expval(qml.Z(1))
```
(but correct me if I'm wrong)

Author: Okay, done!

.. note::

    Alternatively, the QNode can be instantiated directly from the Qiskit circuit:

    .. code-block:: python

        measurements = [qml.expval(qml.Y(0)), qml.var(qml.Z(1))]
        pl_template_from_qk = qml.from_qiskit(qk_circuit, measurements=measurements)
        pl_circuit_from_qk = qml.QNode(pl_template_from_qk, qml.device("default.qubit"))

    Here, the ``measurements`` argument overrides the terminal measurements in the Qiskit circuit.

>     See the :func:`from_qiskit` documentation for more details.

Reviewer: broken link

>     See the :func:`from_qiskit` documentation for more details.

Author: Ah, my bad! It should be ``` :func:`~pennylane.from_qiskit` ```. Thanks for catching that! 🎣

The resulting PennyLane circuit can be executed directly:

>>> pl_circuit_from_qk()
[tensor(0., requires_grad=True), tensor(1., requires_grad=True)]

It can also be visualized using PennyLane's :func:`~pennylane.draw` utility:

>>> print(qml.draw(pl_circuit_from_qk)())
0: ──H─╭●─╭||─┤  <Y>
1: ────╰X─╰||─┤  Var[Z]

OpenQASM
~~~~~~~~

An equivalent quantum circuit can be expressed in OpenQASM 2.0 as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    oq_circuit = (
        """
        OPENQASM 2.0;
        include "qelib1.inc";
        qreg q[2];
        creg c[2];

        h q[0];
        cx q[0], q[1];

        measure q -> c;
        """
    )

We can import this circuit into PennyLane using the PennyLane-Qiskit plugin once more:

.. code-block:: python

    import pennylane as qml

    pl_template_from_oq = qml.from_qasm(oq_circuit)

    @qml.qnode(qml.device("default.qubit"))
    def pl_circuit_from_oq():
        pl_template_from_oq(wires=[0, 1])
        return qml.expval(qml.Y(0)), qml.var(qml.Z(1))

The result is as follows:

>>> print(qml.draw(pl_circuit_from_oq)())
0: ──H─╭●──┤↗├─┤  <Y>

> 1: ────╰X──┤↗├─┤  Var[Z]

Reviewer: I don't love that the measurements are included, see post in Slack. Not a problem with the QuickStart - if anything, evidence that the QuickStart demonstrates the existing behaviour well. But I don't think this is what we want, unfortunately.

Author: That is true although perhaps that makes this a bad candidate circuit for the quickstart. Would it be an improvement if we just change the circuits to measure w.r.t. `qml.Z` instead?

Reviewer 2: What happens if we remove the measure from the QASM script?

Reviewer: I just think most QASM scripts are device instructions and include measure at the end, but I might be wrong. We could just remove it from the QASM script, so we aren't emphasizing a behaviour (automatically overwriting measurements) that we will likely change soon, and then think more about this when we update the QASM conversion functionality in the future.

Author: @lillian542 @trbromley So is the consensus to remove the measurement from the end of the QASM script?

Reviewer 2: Yes please

Quil
~~~~

PennyLane also offers convenience functions for importing circuits from `pyQuil
<https://pyquil-docs.rigetti.com/en/stable/index.html>`__ or Quil representations. Both of these

> require the `PennyLane-Forest <https://docs.pennylane.ai/projects/rigetti/en/stable/>`__ plugin,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
require the `PennyLane-Rigetti <https://docs.pennylane.ai/projects/rigetti/en/stable/>`__ plugin,
```

Author: Whoops, nice catch! 🎣

which can be installed using:

.. code-block::

>     pip install pennylane-forest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    pip install pennylane-rigetti
```

We begin with a familiar pyQuil `Program
<https://pyquil-docs.rigetti.com/en/stable/apidocs/pyquil.quil.html#pyquil.quil.Program>`__:

.. code-block:: python

    import pyquil

    pq_program = pyquil.Program()
    pq_program += pyquil.gates.H(0)
    pq_program += pyquil.gates.CNOT(0, 1)

> This ``Program`` can be converted into a PennyLane quantum function using the :func:`from_pyquil`

Reviewer: broken link

function:

.. code-block:: python

    import pennylane as qml

    pl_template_from_pq = qml.from_pyquil(pq_program)

    @qml.qnode(qml.device("default.qubit"))
    def pl_circuit_from_pq():
        pl_template_from_pq(wires=[0, 1])
        return qml.expval(qml.Y(0)), qml.var(qml.Z(1))

The resulting PennyLane circuit is:

>>> print(qml.draw(pl_circuit_from_pq)())
0: ──H─╭●─┤  <Y>
1: ────╰X─┤  Var[Z]

.. note::

>     Quantum circuits expressed in Quil can be imported in a similar way using :func:`from_quil`.

Reviewer: broken link

Importing Quantum Operators
---------------------------

Sometimes, it is preferable to import a single operation from a framework instead of an entire
quantum circuit. This can save you some keystrokes and serve as a helpful crutch for understanding
an individual component of a circuit.

Presently, only Qiskit `SparsePauliOp
<https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/api/qiskit/qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp>`__ operators can be
imported into PennyLane. To see this in action, we first define a ``SparsePauliOp``:

.. code-block:: python

    from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp

    qk_op = SparsePauliOp(["II", "XY"])

> Then, we apply the :func:`from_qiskit_op` function to convert the ``SparsePauliOp`` into a PennyLane

Reviewer: The `from_qiskit_op` link is not working

Author: Fixed! It should be ``` :func:`~pennylane.from_qiskit_op` ``` and similarly below. Thanks! 🎣

:class:`Operator <pennylane.operation.Operator>`:

.. code-block:: python

    import pennylane as qml

    pl_op = qml.from_qiskit_op(qk_op)

We can inspect both operators to make sure they match:

>>> qk_op
SparsePauliOp(['II', 'XY'],
              coeffs=[1.+0.j, 1.+0.j])
>>> pl_op
I(0) + X(1) @ Y(0)

Parameterized Operators
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

PennyLane also supports importing parameterized ``SparsePauliOp`` instances. Consider:

.. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np
    from qiskit.circuit import Parameter

    a, b, c = [Parameter(var) for var in "abc"]
    param_qk_op = SparsePauliOp(["II", "XZ", "YX"], coeffs=np.array([a, b, c]))

To import this ``SparsePauliOp``, we must specify a concrete value for each coefficient using the
``params`` argument:

.. code-block:: python

    import pennylane as qml

    param_pl_op = qml.from_qiskit_op(param_qk_op, params={a: 2, b: 3, c: 4})

The result is:

>>> param_qk_op
SparsePauliOp(['II', 'XZ', 'YX'],
              coeffs=[ParameterExpression(1.0*a), ParameterExpression(1.0*b),
 ParameterExpression(1.0*c)])
>>> param_pl_op

> (2+0j) * I(0) + (3+0j) * (X(1) @ Z(0)) + (4+0j) * (Y(1) @ X(0))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(
    (2+0j) * I(0)
  + (3+0j) * (X(1) @ Z(0))
  + (4+0j) * (Y(1) @ X(0))
)
```

It prints like this for me 🤷‍♀️

Author: Weird! I just re-ran the script and got the same output as you. 🤷

>>> pl_op
I(0) + X(1) @ Y(0)

Parameterized Operators
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

PennyLane also supports importing parameterized ``SparsePauliOp`` instances. Consider:

.. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np
    from qiskit.circuit import Parameter

    a, b, c = [Parameter(var) for var in "abc"]
    param_qk_op = SparsePauliOp(["II", "XZ", "YX"], coeffs=np.array([a, b, c]))

To import this ``SparsePauliOp``, we must specify a concrete value for each coefficient using the
``params`` argument:

.. code-block:: python

    import pennylane as qml

    param_pl_op = qml.from_qiskit_op(param_qk_op, params={a: 2, b: 3, c: 4})

The result is:

>>> param_qk_op
SparsePauliOp(['II', 'XZ', 'YX'],
              coeffs=[ParameterExpression(1.0*a), ParameterExpression(1.0*b),
 ParameterExpression(1.0*c)])
>>> param_pl_op
(2+0j) * I(0) + (3+0j) * (X(1) @ Z(0)) + (4+0j) * (Y(1) @ X(0))

Import Functions
----------------

:html:`<div class="summary-table">`

.. autosummary::
    :nosignatures:

    ~pennylane.from_pyquil
    ~pennylane.from_qasm
    ~pennylane.from_qasm_file
    ~pennylane.from_qiskit
    ~pennylane.from_qiskit_op
    ~pennylane.from_quil
    ~pennylane.from_quil_file

> :html:`</div>`

Reviewer 3: Optional suggestion: might make sense to have this at the top of the page, as the quickstart acts as reference documentation?

Author: I'm open to that idea! What do you think, @trbromley?

Reviewer 2: Sounds good, I've left some comments to suggest how to do this.

.. role:: html(raw)
   :format: html

.. _intro_ref_importing_circuits:

> Importing circuits
> ==================

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Importing workflows
===================
```
To make this a bit more general.

Author: Sounds good! I'll update the order of the quick start page in the sidebar too.

Author: Oh, I was thinking just below it (to keep things sorted). What do you think? 🤔

Reviewer 2: Yes, that's great!

> PennyLane offers the :mod:`~.io` module to import quantum circuits and operations that were

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PennyLane supports importing quantum circuits and operations that were
```
The `io` module is not so user facing here.

Author: Good catch! 🎣

> constructed outside of PennyLane. This includes circuits defined using `Qiskit <https://www.ibm.com/quantum/qiskit>`__,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
constructed in another library. This includes circuits defined using `Qiskit <https://www.ibm.com/quantum/qiskit>`__,
```
Just to avoid repetition of saying PL twice.

Author: That's fair although I don't think "library" is the best choice since OpenQASM (and Quil) aren't exactly libraries. Can you think of a more general way to rephrase this one? Perhaps
```suggestion
constructed using another framework. This includes circuits defined using `Qiskit <https://www.ibm.com/quantum/qiskit>`__,
```

> `OpenQASM <https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/build/interoperate-qiskit-qasm2>`_, and `Quil

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`OpenQASM <https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.03429>`_, and `Quil
```
Unfortunately the main openQasm docs are for v3, so maybe we just link to the original paper

Author: Good idea! Thanks for finding the link. 🔗

<https://docs.rigetti.com/qcs/guides/quil>`_.

.. note::

    To import a quantum circuit defined using a particular framework, you will need to install the
    corresponding PennyLane plugin for that framework. More information about PennyLane plugins is
    available on the `plugins <https://pennylane.ai/plugins.html>`_ page.

Importing quantum circuits
--------------------------

Importing quantum circuits can help you take advantage of PennyLane's various optimization,
visualization, and interoperability features for existing circuits. For example, you can take a
``QuantumCircuit`` from Qiskit, import it into PennyLane, and then apply a `circuit-cutting transform
<https://pennylane.ai/qml/demos/tutorial_quantum_circuit_cutting/>`_ to reduce the number of qubits
required to implement the circuit. You could also :ref:`compile <intro_ref_compile_circuits>` the
circuit using `Catalyst <https://docs.pennylane.ai/projects/catalyst/en/stable/index.html>`__ or

> execute the circuit remotely using a supported hardware provider.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
differentiate and optimize the circuit using :ref:`quantum-specific optimizers <intro_ref_opt>`.
```
Just want to highlight differentiability as one of PL's major features.

Author: Sure, that works too! I'm not sure how many people would define a circuit in e.g. Qiskit and then want to execute it on e.g. Rigetti's hardware.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

:html:`<div class="summary-table">`

.. autosummary::
    :nosignatures:

    ~pennylane.from_pyquil
    ~pennylane.from_qasm
    ~pennylane.from_qasm_file
    ~pennylane.from_qiskit
    ~pennylane.from_quil
    ~pennylane.from_quil_file

:html:`</div>`

```

Qiskit
~~~~~~

To import a quantum circuit from Qiskit, you must first install the `PennyLane-Qiskit

> <https://docs.pennylane.ai/projects/qiskit/en/stable/>`__ plugin. This can be done by running:
> 
> .. code-block::
> 
>     pip install pennylane-qiskit

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<https://docs.pennylane.ai/projects/qiskit/en/latest/>`__ plugin.
```
I would rather users refer to the installation instructions in the plugin, as that contains our recommended pin to <1.0.

Author: Sure, we can do that! The reason I put it in initially is that I was thinking of the quick start page as a one-stop shop for learning about importing workflows.

Now, suppose we define a Qiskit `QuantumCircuit

> <https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/api/qiskit/qiskit.circuit.QuantumCircuit>`__ as follows:

Reviewer 2: Minor point, but feels like the link out to QuantumCircuit in Qiskit docs should happen the first time we encounter `QuantumCircuit` further up.

.. code-block:: python

    from qiskit import QuantumCircuit

>     qk_circuit = QuantumCircuit(2, 1)

Reviewer 2: Where does the `k` in `qk` come from?

Reviewer 2: Ohh `QisKit` :laughing:

Author: That's right! Do you have a preference for a different naming convention?

Reviewer 2: I'm more familiar with the `qc` we use in [`from_qiskit`](https://xanaduai-pennylane--5281.com.readthedocs.build/en/5281/code/api/pennylane.from_qiskit.html), but not a blocker for this PR.

Author: It's not a big deal to switch from `qk` to `qc` here if you like!

Reviewer 2: No worries, if it works currently it's good for me.

    qk_circuit.h(0)
    qk_circuit.cx(0, 1)
    qk_circuit.measure_all()

We can convert the ``QuantumCircuit`` into a PennyLane quantum function using:

.. code-block:: python

    import pennylane as qml

    pl_template_from_qk = qml.from_qiskit(qk_circuit)

Above, the :func:`~pennylane.from_qiskit` function converts a ``QuantumCircuit`` into a PennyLane

> template. This template can then be called from inside a QNode to generate a PennyLane circuit:

Reviewer 2: Similar to the updated docs of `from_qiskit`, I'd rephrase to talk about this as a quantum function rather than a template.

.. code-block:: python

    @qml.qnode(qml.device("default.qubit"))
    def pl_circuit_from_qk():
        pl_template_from_qk(wires=[0, 1])
        return qml.expval(qml.Y(0)), qml.expval(qml.Z(1))

.. note::

    Alternatively, the QNode can be instantiated directly from the Qiskit circuit:

    .. code-block:: python

        measurements = [qml.expval(qml.Y(0)), qml.var(qml.Z(1))]
        pl_template_from_qk = qml.from_qiskit(qk_circuit, measurements=measurements)
        pl_circuit_from_qk = qml.QNode(pl_template_from_qk, qml.device("default.qubit"))

    Here, the ``measurements`` argument overrides the terminal measurements in the Qiskit circuit.
    See the :func:`~pennylane.from_qiskit` documentation for more details.

The resulting PennyLane circuit can be executed directly:

>>> pl_circuit_from_qk()

> [tensor(0., requires_grad=True), tensor(1., requires_grad=True)]

Reviewer 2: As a stretch goal, could we redo the circuit so that it has a variational parameter, and we show here how easy it is to calculate the gradient?

Author: Yeah, I think that should be possible.

Author: @trbromley If we were to introduce a variational parameter, would it be OK for the QASM and pyQuil circuits to no longer match?

Reviewer 2: Yes I'm good if we have a special case for Qiskit.

Reviewer 2: Decision: this can be in a follow up

require the `PennyLane-Rigetti <https://docs.pennylane.ai/projects/rigetti/en/stable/>`__ plugin,
which can be installed using:

.. code-block::

    pip install pennylane-rigetti

We begin with a familiar pyQuil `Program
<https://pyquil-docs.rigetti.com/en/stable/apidocs/pyquil.quil.html#pyquil.quil.Program>`__:

.. code-block:: python

    import pyquil

    pq_program = pyquil.Program()
    pq_program += pyquil.gates.H(0)
    pq_program += pyquil.gates.CNOT(0, 1)

This ``Program`` can be converted into a PennyLane quantum function using the
:func:`~pennylane.from_pyquil` function:

.. code-block:: python

    import pennylane as qml

    pl_template_from_pq = qml.from_pyquil(pq_program)

    @qml.qnode(qml.device("default.qubit"))
    def pl_circuit_from_pq():
        pl_template_from_pq(wires=[0, 1])
        return qml.expval(qml.Y(0)), qml.var(qml.Z(1))

The resulting PennyLane circuit is:

>>> print(qml.draw(pl_circuit_from_pq)())
0: ──H─╭●─┤  <Y>
1: ────╰X─┤  Var[Z]

.. note::

    Quantum circuits expressed in Quil can be imported in a similar way using
    :func:`~pennylane.from_quil`.

> Importing Quantum Operators
> ---------------------------

Author: ```suggestion
Importing quantum operators
---------------------------
```

> Sometimes, it is preferable to import a single operation from a framework instead of an entire
> quantum circuit. This can save you some keystrokes and serve as a helpful crutch for understanding
> an individual component of a circuit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As well as circuits, it can be useful to import operators defined in other frameworks into
PennyLane. This can be useful for workflows that involve calculating the expectation
value of an observable. By mapping to PennyLane, we can make the workflow differentiable
while maintaining access to features like :mod:`grouping <pennylane.pauli>` for
hardware-efficient execution.
```
Just want to position it more towards expectation values.

Author: Sounds good! Applied. 🚀

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

:html:`<div class="summary-table">`

.. autosummary::
    :nosignatures:

    ~pennylane.from_qiskit_op

:html:`</div>`
```

Presently, only Qiskit `SparsePauliOp
<https://docs.quantum.ibm.com/api/qiskit/qiskit.quantum_info.SparsePauliOp>`__ operators can be
imported into PennyLane. To see this in action, we first define a ``SparsePauliOp``:

.. code-block:: python

    from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp

    qk_op = SparsePauliOp(["II", "XY"])

Then, we apply the :func:`~pennylane.from_qiskit_op` function to convert the ``SparsePauliOp`` into
a PennyLane :class:`Operator <pennylane.operation.Operator>`:

.. code-block:: python

    import pennylane as qml

    pl_op = qml.from_qiskit_op(qk_op)

We can inspect both operators to make sure they match:

>>> qk_op
SparsePauliOp(['II', 'XY'],
              coeffs=[1.+0.j, 1.+0.j])
>>> pl_op
I(0) + X(1) @ Y(0)

> Parameterized Operators
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Author: ```suggestion
Parameterized operators
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

> Parameterized operators
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
> 
> PennyLane also supports importing parameterized ``SparsePauliOp`` instances. Consider:
> 
> .. code-block:: python
> 
>     import numpy as np
>     from qiskit.circuit import Parameter
> 
>     a, b, c = [Parameter(var) for var in "abc"]
>     param_qk_op = SparsePauliOp(["II", "XZ", "YX"], coeffs=np.array([a, b, c]))
> 
> To import this ``SparsePauliOp``, we must specify a concrete value for each coefficient using the
> ``params`` argument:
> 
> .. code-block:: python
> 
>     import pennylane as qml
> 
>     param_pl_op = qml.from_qiskit_op(param_qk_op, params={a: 2, b: 3, c: 4})
> 
> The result is:
> 
> >>> param_qk_op
> SparsePauliOp(['II', 'XZ', 'YX'],
>               coeffs=[ParameterExpression(1.0*a), ParameterExpression(1.0*b),
>  ParameterExpression(1.0*c)])
> >>> param_pl_op
> (
>     (2+0j) * I(0)
>   + (3+0j) * (X(1) @ Z(0))
>   + (4+0j) * (Y(1) @ X(0))
> )
> 
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Up for discussion, but how about we take this out of the quickstart to keep it lightweight.

Author: Sure, I think it would be nice to keep this part streamlined. The main emphasis should be on circuits.

> Import Functions
> ----------------

Author: ```suggestion
Import functions
----------------
```

> Import functions
> ----------------
> 
> :html:`<div class="summary-table">`
> 
> .. autosummary::
>     :nosignatures:
> 
>     ~pennylane.from_pyquil
>     ~pennylane.from_qasm
>     ~pennylane.from_qasm_file
>     ~pennylane.from_qiskit
>     ~pennylane.from_qiskit_op
>     ~pennylane.from_quil
>     ~pennylane.from_quil_file
> 
> :html:`</div>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
